In this section, we will talk about the Computer Tomography scanners or CT scanners.
The core operational agents of a CT scanner are
photons or electromagnetic waves of high frequency.
As a reminder about electromagnetic spectrum,
let's look at this diagram.
You can see RF waves here were things like
FM and AM radio wave are residing in the low frequency area,
and as frequency goes up,
we have the visible light spectrum and then ultraviolet spectrum or the X-rays.
X-rays are followed by Gamma rays,
which are well known to be one form of
penetrating radiation produced by radioactive decay.
Gamma radiation is ionizing radiation,
and such radiation is known to be harmful to living organisms.
X-rays, while not usually a result of radioactive decay,
are also a form of ionizing radiation and therefore can be harmful in large quantities.
A relevant impact on what we do here is
that CT scanning tends to carry risks to the patient,
and the ordering physician would be less likely to prescribe this form of
scanning if there is no harm that can result from not doing the scan.
When we'll look at this diagram,
we see the basic principle of an X-ray machine.
A patient is positioned between the X-ray source and an X-ray detector.
The X-rays passing through the body are attenuated by
the patient's anatomy and are captured by the detector like in a digital camera.
In a CT scanner,
we also have a device called collimator which shapes X-rays
to a narrow beam that only passes through one slice of the patient body.
The T in a CT scanner stands for tomography,
and tomography means cross-sectional imaging.
Here's how it works in the case of CT scanners.
A single image is sticking from
a given angle by emitting a beam that passes through the body,
gets attenuated by it,
and it's captured by the detector.
A snapshot from a single point of view is not enough to
understand the spatial relationship between the different structures inside the body,
and thus we need to have what's called the gantry in the case of CT machines.
A gantry is a cylinder with a mechanism inside
that allows the X-ray source to rotate around the center.
A patient is positioned into the center,
and thus as a source rotates around the patient,
the detector can take images of projections from different angles.
Combining these projections through a process called back projection
allows us to reconstruct a single slice through the patient body.
Later in the lesson,
you will get the chance to build a simple algorithm that reconstructs such a slice.
Now, this idea of slices bring us into the third dimension.
If we position the patient on a moving table,
have the stable move slowly through
the gantry while our detectors spin around the patient,
we can image a stack of slices with
a very small distance between them and going as low as fractions of a millimeter,
and this is exactly what the CT scanner is doing.
This is an image of one.
You have a moving table in the middle here,
you have your gantry here,
and you have all the machinery inside that is
needed to support the rotation of the detectors and emitters.
In the next section, we will see how MRI scanners
work and why they are different while looking quite similar.
But before that, let's have you do a small exercise.